Welcome, everybody, to another Voices with Ravik.
I'm very excited about this because my good friend and long time interlocutor and philosophical
partner in crime and all the other wonderful epithet we might give to each other is back.
And we're going to have a series of discussions about a very important topic.
And of course, I'm talking about Jordan Hall.
Jordan, it's so great to be with you here again.
And I want you to take some time.
Everybody should know we sort of talked about this before off-camera.
We've got some ideas about basic architecture.
And Jordan's going to propose that, run through it,
and then we'll enter into a more of a dialogical format.
So Jordan, please take it away.
Thank you.
I'm just putting this on.
Do not disturb.
OK, so the topic here, I think last time we talked about it, we pinned the name,
the Neo-Neocortex, or a new form or a new approach to the problem of governance.
And when we talked last time, what I noticed was that I've been running into this particular
territory from a variety of distinct subgroups, subdomains, both different areas
of kind of an intellectual endeavor, but also completely different communities
that in some sense don't even consider themselves to have any real relationship with each other.
And yet, this problem of proper governance in a particularly new fashion
ends up being a bit of a Venn diagram where they're beginning to converge.
And I think increasingly self-aware.
So let me just list a couple of what these domains look like.
And you'll notice that they are, many of them will look at the problem differently.
So for example, the OG, the original point that brought us here was actually your own thing,
the various projects that you're now bringing into the world,
and the conversations I was having with Ryan, correct?
About the particular problem of governance is being central to...
Ryan Barton.
Ryan Barton, right.
Yeah, how do we give rise to a new form of collaboration around the question of,
for example, bringing embodied wisdom more fully into the world?
And how do we do this in a fashion where many of the things that we know just consistently
plague any kind of new institution don't happen?
Like, we'd like to avoid that.
We'd like to preemptively design something where capture, malincentive,
or becoming centralized in a single individual don't occur.
But other places, in the technical world, the space known as DAOS,
which is a piece of the kind of the emerging crypto blockchain universe,
are now very deeply focused on this question of what does proper governance look like?
Now, they may think of it as DAO governance, but my point is,
it's actually looking at a new form of governance.
So I'll get into some detail on that in a moment.
And another individual named Balaji Srinivasan has, I think, pretty well put a stake in the
ground around the thing he's calling network states, which he specifically positions as being
a next step beyond the nation state, and in particular, call for a new form of governance.
And then we'll shift.
So if we're looking at, say, ordinary politics, we can look at some of the problems that are
in the space of the increasing polarization that seems to be happening across the Western world,
and is, in many ways, locked in to the actual design, the underlying architecture of how we
run government produces, invariably, polarization, has a very hard time dealing with polarization.
And so a new form of governance is being called for a look at in those worlds as well.
And I mean, actually, practically.
We can also look at the problem of geopolitics and what looks like the shift of the world,
and from a single hegemonic mono superpower into an increasingly multipolar world,
which we don't really know how to do that, particularly in the context of things like
escalating technological capability, where we can't solve interstate conflicts with
escalating kinetic military conflict, and in the context of an entirely new form of war
called unrestricted warfare, which I'll just flag for those who understand that.
And my kind of cutting edge of investigation of both the multipolar geopolitics
and the notion of unrestricted warfare is also looking at what are new forms of governance
that can respond to this category of problem.
And then shifting again, in the age of Elon, questions around platforms, social media,
in his case, and particularly Twitter, we can think about Facebook and Instagram,
where we recognize that the governance principles like free speech aren't robust enough to respond.
For example, just a simple notion that because Twitter is a private company,
the kind of the juridical principles of freedom of speech in the United States
have a hard time grasping it, and yet clearly it has a very profound role to play
in how the thing called free speech plays out in our polity.
And in fact, Elon has particularly called or pointed towards the direction of Twitter
as a foundation for a new form of collective intelligence.
And so if we can think about how the neo-neocortex and notions like distributed cognition
are related, you can see how there's a grope in that in the direction of a new form of governance.
And I got two more. The groups of individuals that have been looking at how do we tackle the
problem of planetary scale governance. And this includes that whole category of things
that we've talked about, hyper-objects, where the kind of nation-state on steroids,
the international structure like the IMF and the UN,
which was the best the mid-century could pull off, clearly aren't able to deal with planetary
scale governance problems. We again are finding ourselves having to think about
what might a new appropriate form of governance look like. And the last one I'll throw into the mix
is the AI alignment problem, which might feel weird. I mean, I don't mean this necessarily
from the point of view of sort of how do we build a department of AI alignment
as a kind of a regulatory institution. What might we ever, under any circumstances,
put in place that could actually do that job? And I'll get into some detail about
how that plays out in a moment. So that's an example of the diversity of different domains
and the different kinds of groups, many of whom don't believe they're in the same space,
that I personally am spending time with, that this question of what is a novel form of proper
governance, both in terms of its potential and in some sense in terms of its necessity, bring up.
So this is an instance of what Arlen calls problem finding. And one way of understanding that,
one interpretation I've given that is, you have a bunch of problems that seem disparate,
and then you find a core central problem. And children seem to demonstrate this when they
go through developmental stages, you find a core central problem, that if you solve that core
central problem, all these other problems will be significantly either solved or reformulated
in a powerful and insightful manner. You know, I've had to do something like that with my work
on relevance realization, sort of the found problem underneath all these other, what seemed
like disparate problems in categorization, etc. So it sounds to me like you're proposing that kind
of thing, that like, here's a bunch of things that seem disparate. But if you write, they intersect
at this core problem, and if this course problem gets addressed, it will systemically and systematically
feed out to the other problems and bring about a very comprehensive change.
Yes, yes, I think that's exactly right. And what it would look like from the inside for some of
these particular domains would be a kind of a different way of looking at the whole problem
that they're looking at, which would resolve a gordian knot, for example.
Yes, yes, yes. And facilitate coordination between the groups too.
Exactly, quite to the point, which in many cases might avoid some catastrophes that happen when
they're unconsciously coordinating, for example, AI and unrestricted warfare. And this is a situation
where they're implicitly coordinating in a negative way, and we'd actually like to invert that
relationship. And so, to the point there, something that I think also comes up in this
kind of conversation is that, for me at least, this investigation is not a kind of a question of
a progressive effort to just make a better kind of governance. And it's certainly not even vaguely
utopian. In some senses, it's almost the exact inverse. It's just more a question of necessity
and timing. My sense of things is just we happen to be here. We're in a moment where there are
profound changes that are afoot, and that if existing global institutions and existing forms
of governance could in fact provide adequate governance to allow us to navigate these problems,
then we should just do that. But it's only in fact because they don't, that we're going to have to
take this sort of step. So that's the dose of practicality that I think is important if you're
going to step into this space. So what I'd like to do is I'd like to drop two big conceptual
frameworks that I personally have talked about in the past, but it's been a while. And I don't
think, I think it's worth kind of articulating them in a little bit of detail, both to help frame
the nature of the transition to the shift, and also to begin creating the,
funny, I think of it as the phase space or the vector diagram of what the
kind of the proper solution looks like. So the first one is the, I guess, the philosophical
or the theoretical framework of media studies, and particularly McLuhan.
So here, one way of looking at things is to say that we're currently living in a world
that is in many ways a result of literacy, of writing, that we are living in the era of literacy.
And if we can think about the kinds of shifts that have occurred, and both in terms of kind
rate and comprehensivity, it helps us get, I think, both a sense of how we got to where we are
and also what it will look like by necessity as we're going to where we're going. So the first
point would be something like, if we wind the clock back to the medieval world, and we drop
ourselves into 1440 in the Gutenberg press, and then we identify changes that occur. And I'm going
to say at the level of governance, and this might bring up some questions about what I've
been mean by that term, but things like the Protestant Revolution and things like the
Thirty Years' War. And there was a fundamental shift of the infrastructure of governance in
the eruption of Protestantism, which I, in this case, will propose was at least meaningfully attached
to the rise of literacy or the written book, which then itself presaged, but also combined with the
implications of literacy in the more political domain, and this gave rise to the Thirty Years'
War. But other domains like the emergence of the Royal Society, which could only happen when
people were literate, and people who could write were sharing written works with each other,
and could be engaging in the peer-to-peer collaborative discovery of the nature of
reality in a very different fashion. And I would point even more pointedly to the emergence of
the shift of the Constitution, and the fact that we now live in a world that is profoundly
constitutional from the throughout the 19th century. And of course, as a result of two
major world wars, most of the world is now living in a form of government that is founded in a
written document, a constitution, which is unconsciously, I think in many ways, simply a
consequence of thinking that that's the proper way to do things. One aspect of which, by the way,
is the Napoleonic Code. And I was looking at some conversations recently coming out of Africa where
we're talking about the fact that the efforts of the Napoleonic Code, which is a governance by
proposition, don't work very well. And that the countries that found themselves subject to that
form of governance have not fared as well as those who were able to operate using the common law,
which I would say is governance by participatory relationship. And which, by the way, connected
with their indigenous governance methodologies upon getting back. And then finally, just to make
sure the space of the scope of what we're talking about is rolled in, the notion of corporations
and things like the British East India Company, which in many ways, both were built on top of and
massively innovated the technologies of bureaucracy, which of course is the training people to be
literate and then taking those literate people to run a global empire on the basis of what is
effectively handwritten letters and accounting systems. And so this is a story that talks about
the notion of governance and its very shape and scope and how it rolled out over about 500 years.
And then the point is to say, we're now well into the era of the digital. And the digital is different
fundamentally and has profound implications for that same set of scopes. And I would expand,
by the way, to include down deep into the basis of how we produce the notion of individuals.
So it's a psychological question, as well as an institutional question. And one inquiry that
we'll be running into when we ask this question of what is the new form of governance? What is the
neo-New York Cortex? What is the new set of literacies and the new forms of generative grammar,
as well as what are the new forms of institution and the new forms of structures?
And we'll be guided by thinking about what are the implications of the essence of the shift of
digital and how that might help us better understand what are the likely kind of laminar flows or the
downhill directionality. Digital is going to be driving us in a certain direction, which may simply
by the way, the release of some of the consequences of writing or literacy,
that'll help us understand better. So I'll return to that when we get past the next big
conceptual chunk. Does all that track so well so far? Yeah, I just wanted to ask what else is
included. I mean, I get the argument, and of course, the literacy argument starts in the axial
revolution, and then you get the introduction of punctuation, and then you get the Carolingian
script, and it ramps up, and it ramps up, and it ramps up. And then as you say, you get the
Protestant Reformation, and you get the possibility of the Scientific Revolution, and then of course,
the Thirty Years' War. And then, attendant to that, and to me, this is part of the emergence of the
idea of the self-constituting state, the social contracting state that contracts itself into
existence through a written contract, that's what a constitution basically is, is dependent on
one of the major consequences of the Thirty Years' War, which is the acceleration of secularism,
the acceleration of the separation of church and state, the making of religion private,
in a way that cuts us off from all of our previous history in a really profound way,
so that a lot of the other ways in which authority, which I take to be the fundamental
capacity for governance, is determined. So there were many other ways in which authority was
determined, and then they get reduced, I would say, via secularism to the notion of the social
contract as typified, as you said. So the authorities accrue to written text, that's why you have to
sign your name, so the written text and the sacred becomes to be associated with the sacred,
the scriptures, the writings, more and more and more in the Protestant revolution,
solar scriptura. And so you get that and the social contract, and that's the only basis for
any authority, there's no other basis for authority, whereas there used to be things
reasonably like tradition, religion, kinship systems, all kinds of things that limited
the political economic enterprises that human beings engage in. All of those are basically
removed. Well, I'm not saying they're removed completely, but they're denuded, they're diminished,
they're demarcated off. Does that track is also part of what you're talking about?
Absolutely. In fact, perfectly. Yeah, in fact, let me just move into the next piece,
because there's so many different directions. Let me hold this, but there's something about,
so I'm now going to take a skew or a bleak look that cuts through the frame
and in many ways, producing some really interesting synergies. So this has to do with that whole
framework of complexity and the complicated. Right. Yes.
I'm tempted to sort of immediately riff, but I'll try to stay a little bit more
rigorous for a moment. So, you know, as you know, this is a distinction. In my experience, I learned
from Dave Snowden, although I spent enough time at the Santa Fe Institute to drink
of the well of complexity directly. But the notion that complicated was definitely
from him, from me. And the distinction, I think, is very profound. I would say in a particular way,
it looks like a little bit of the classic map territory distinction, where the territory,
the complex is fundamental. It is just sort of what's there. It's reality. And then the complicated
is a thing that humans can do. We can create a model and we can control or we can foreground
certain aspects of the complex by virtue of creating certain technologies. And I'll get into
an example of what I mean about that in a moment. And then we can endeavor to do things like optimize
for or optimize against to exclude aspects of that system. So agriculture is a classic example.
You say, well, I want a whole lot of wheat. And I'm going to be able to create a control system
by virtue of certain technologies like a plow and irrigation and pesticides and just the practice
of understanding that wheat seeds produce wheat plants. And therefore have a much larger yield
of wheat in a certain territory of land than would happen in a fashion that is
how nature would do it. So that's the kind of the ticket. And what's interesting here in this
distinction is that in some sense, neither Kuhn nor Tainter use this particular framework. And
yet if you use this framework, you could say that they're both, they both looked at this problem
in completely different ways, right? Kuhn was looking at scientific paradigms,
both in terms of how they manifested in the psychologists of scientists
and in how they manifested in the institutions of science. But nonetheless,
he was investigating or diagnosing how complicated systems, paradigms, played out
in both in terms of how they developed, how they responded to the problematic that the map is
never fully the territory. And as the territory changes, or as the needs of the map change,
if you're stuck with trying to make the map work, you end up with a occlusion problem.
And the challenge of actually what happens when psychologists lose the fact that they're
actually using maps and then mistake it for the territory. And then the flip side is that Tainter
was looking at it from the point of view of anthropology, trying to discover why it was
that civilizations collapsed, he called them complex societies. I would say that he was
properly discussing the collapse of complicated societies, and frankly looked at a lot of the
same kinds of dynamics. And so that tells us something that we are sitting in, yet another,
complicated society that has a marriage to a particular set of paradigms. And both from a
Tainter analysis and a Coonian analysis, all the signs point to we're reaching the end of that.
And the inquiry in now is we would look like to try to consciously develop something,
which is no longer simply unconsciously instantiating another form of complicated governance
system, another kind of complicated society on top of it, which we may find ourselves doing
willy-nilly, but it'd be wise if we could be more careful about it. But is there a way of actually
creating a principled return? I'm going to use the word return specifically to the complex.
So I'll give you an example. And I think you've made just pointed to it, which makes it collaborative.
For a long time, certainly for the past couple of hundred years, we've been living with a
false dichotomy between the state and the market as fundamental grounds of ways that
societies can govern choices. And so we can either turn the dial way up via highly authoritarian,
totalitarian, bureaucratic governance system, where there's an effort or an intent to govern
choices to a very fine-grained level by virtue of complicated bureaucracies to be very straightforward.
And I would propose, by the way, at this moment, a theoretical level that
if I take the notion of the virtual or the notion of the capacity at all, the basic human
capacity to do this thing, to create an abstraction, to create a model, to produce something in the
realm of the virtual and then a map, and then use that to feed back on, to engage in niche
construction on nature. So I'm proposing that that's a thing that we can do, and then, of course,
that we do do, that it splits, in some sense, down the middle in a very interesting way.
And one side of that split is the state, the realm of design, the realm of the model,
the realm of cybernetic command and control systems, and to the degree to which we're investing
that with authority and responsibility, we find ourselves in all the various kind of failure
conditions that have been explored by those who critique the state as a form. For example,
it's its limited capacity and it's limited bandwidth, and therefore, it's, you know,
calculation problems, as an example. Now, here's the interesting piece for me. I would say that
exact same move, that move of abstraction, also gives rise to the other side of the equation,
which right now just characterizes the market, but broadly what I mean is,
and I think this is, I'm just throwing this out there, but I think it's, it will prove a very
interesting proposition, which is, if I take our indigenous capacities, our ordinary human
capacities to engage in governance unconsciously, you know, the things that we just did for hundreds
of thousands, if not millions of years, but certainly hundreds of thousands of years,
in adaptive response to our natural environment. And then what we do is we inject the consequence
of complicatedness, which is to say we inject the consequence of technology,
whether this is physical technology or psychotechnologies, cultural technologies into the,
into the mix. What we get is a random walk of our overwhelmed indigenous governance capacities,
trying to navigate a landscape of accelerating innovation. Does that make sense?
Yes, it does. Yes. And so this is the other problem. This is sometimes been talked about
as the MOLOC problem, but I would say that quite fundamentally, it has to do with the fact, the
premise, that our existing baseline indigenous governance capacities, which actually do a very
fine job of navigating free paleolithic environmental niches, find themselves struggling
precisely because their output, the technological consequences of those capacities, change the
context that they're endeavoring to govern in a fashion that overwhelms those governance capacities.
And this is the problematic of the market. Now, the meta problem is that we've found ourselves
back into the corner of forgetting that these are two versions of the same basic thing.
They both are versions of the complicated and that the effort to govern the failures of the
market by means of the state or to govern the failures of the state by the liberations of the
market are not going to work, meaning that that actually is the limited area. It's the
false dichotomy that modernity has found itself stuck in the past 150 or 200 years or so.
And the proposition I would make is that it is, in fact, by virtue of the rediscovery of the third
term, which we've talked about is just the commons, the return of the commons, return to the complex,
but now at a higher tone with a clear cut mandate to be able to resolve this problem of, in fact,
specifically anthro complexity, resolve the problem of the fact that humans' capacity to
feedback on our environment itself is so significant that we have to actually apply that specifically
to the problem of governance so that our governance capacity is now equal to
our other technical capacities to change the natural environment.
Do that make any sense?
Yeah, but I'm going to ask some clarification questions.
So I'm trying to get at the, I guess, the crucial difference between complexity
and complicated, because it seems to me that any proposal for resolving the mismatch or the
misalignment between those two, which seems to be shared by both the proposal of the state
running things or the market running things, depends on getting very clear on that distinction.
Does that follow so far?
Yeah, that sounds great.
Okay, so now I'm hearing a couple of things that might be candidates,
but I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not foisting any of these on you, I want to hear, right?
A one candidate might be, it might just be the, the, the, a simplistic one.
And I don't think you're saying this, you know, some, you can be saying something very trivial.
When you say the map isn't the territory, you can be saying something trivial like, well,
a representation is never identical to the thing it's represented.
And that's like, yeah, that's what makes it a representation, because if it was identical,
it would be an instance, not a representation.
And so you're not making a, I think, a logically trivial point like that.
You're trying to say something, no, though.
When I'm talking about, what I hear you saying is when I'm talking about complicated is there
can be any, they can be many variables and there can be many degrees of freedom,
but there is no fundamental uncertainty.
There may be risk, but risk is calculable and it does not possess genuine uncertainty.
This is a lot of the work I'm doing on rationality now.
In fact, this system, one of the ways the complex is equivocated into the complicated
is by redefining uncertainty as risk, which is precisely not what uncertainty is.
So you can have complicated and what you do is you do risk management.
Whereas the complex says there is actual uncertainty, which are
entities, process events, not captured by your variable.
And you're caught in a bias variance problem when you try to track them.
If you open up to too much sensitivity, you get overfitting.
And if you reduce your sensitivity, you get bias.
And there's no final solution to that, which means the uncertainties will always be
generative. There will always be creating emergent things that slam into your complicated system.
Is that a way of capturing it well?
Yes. That is a very good way of capturing it.
I'm laughing because I was preparing myself to try to respond to your question.
And as you kept going, I was like, I think you pretty much nailed it.
So yes, very much so.
Beautifully put. Thank you.
Right. And then that means a fundamental shift from monological management into
dialogical evolution. This is something you and I have talked about.
What we do is no, we've got this thing, this mono system, and it manages.
And we are like that. We are just monological reasoners.
And we manage. And then it's that monological management.
And then it's like, no, if, if complexity is not identical and can never be identified with
the complicated, whatever we have over here has to be constantly in a dialogical relationship
with that and constantly evolving in that relationship, as opposed to trying to monologically
manage reality. It's in a dialogical responsiveness evolution with reality.
Does that also part of what's following from this fight?
Yes, very much so. If you think about this in the context of something like AI,
it provides a nice kind of perspective to think about that, right? The, the notion that
you know, no kind of finite state machine is ever actually going to be able to
fully exhaust the generative possibility of emergent reality.
Yeah. The way I would put this is the complicated tries to pre-specify relevance
and it can't. Relevance is always within relevance realization, which is constantly evolving.
And I, and I think, and I think the problem with contracts and text and laws and rules is they
overestimate our capacity for pre-specifying relevance.
Exactly. And this, and this gets us, so for example, the distinction between common law
and civic civil code or Napoleonic code is precisely that, right? The Napoleonic code
in the classic hubris of the French Revolution, right? Because they, as you said, that notion
of a break, like they quite self-consciously said, we're making a complete break with all tradition.
I would say just made the error. They simply, you know, maybe didn't fully understand that
they were making a category error, but they made the category error of thinking that they could
fully prescribe a comprehensive code of law and write it down. And then all your early
job is to sort of look up on the lookup table. Oh, this is an example of that. And here's the
result, right? And, you know, the point is that's actually not a valid approach.
I want to emphasize that what happens is these things like constitutions function because of
implicit constraints of embeddedness that have not come into the explicit prescription.
For example, and Madison was very clear about this, the American constitution
depended on the size of the country and the speed at which communication could work
in order to it be effectively a counteract, the constitution to effectively counteract mob, right?
And so the size of the country and the slowness of communication were actually presupposed in
the functioning of the constitution. And those preconditions have now completely dissolved.
And yet, right, that doesn't mean the constitution has been in any important way updated to take
that loss of the preconditions, which are important enabling constraints into account.
Right. And to kind of push that, for example, a difference between literacy writing and digital
is the speed of computation. Yes. That notion of speed, like in the movement from 1776 to say
1976, cars and airplanes and telephones radically increased the speed of communication,
but infinitesimally compared to what happened post computation. Yes. Yes. So that's a sort of,
there's a difference that makes a difference that makes a difference that's landing now.
And the split or the drift between the fittedness of the enumeration of power,
the enumeration institution that was valid in 1776 is increasingly no longer valid
because of this kind of a difference. So I just want to take one historical lesson.
And I think it's your date 1776 is really wonderful because I see Vietnam, the war in Vietnam,
as the sort of realization is quite the right word, but the coming into the foreground of the
fact that the country could be reached in an almost simultaneous manner through television.
And therefore the political system and the political system almost breaks under the,
and then you have the attempt of the government to then do various ways of controlling and
centralizing the press. And then that gets blown apart again by the internet and cable and all that
stuff. Right. I'm just trying to give some concrete instances so people can track
the kind of thing we're talking about here. Yeah. It's useful, I would say, and maybe worth
doing the explication of these two different frameworks, the notion of the implications of
the media form on the possibility landscape of human choice and therefore the construct of
psychology and instrumental institution necessary to enable that choice to be flowing in a coherent
fashion, i.e. governance. And then the second category, right, this nation, this distinction
between the complicated and the complex. But let me move for a moment into something like
please some practical, some practical proposition. So given these frameworks,
what are some things that we might think about that are likely going to be part of the neo-neo
cortex? For example, what are the new literacies? What are the new, what might be the minimum viable
capacities embodied in humans, individual humans, in any form of new model of governance?
Let me just put a little bullet point on one, which is to say we're going to have to figure out the
proper role of technology. I think it's relatively obvious at this point that simply allowing technology
to be an unconscious producer of novelty governed effectively entirely by market and state,
poorly in both cases, is no longer adequate. We actually really have to think that one of
the primary questions that the neo-neo cortex needs to address is the proper role of technology.
And I'd like to point out a few interesting qualities here that I'm not sure are sort of
properly considered or fully considered in most discourse. One of the consequences of the era
of literacy was one of the negative consequences of the era of literacy was that it had this
consequence of converting humans into mediocre machines. And most of the infrastructure of
education, frankly, has been precisely to do that, to embed in humans the sort of algorithmic capacity
to run the complicated bureaucracies that allow governance to occur. And the easiest, best example
of that, it was the notion of the calculator, which as you know, was originally a human job,
particular people. So it was the word computer. The word computer was also originally applied
to human beings. Human beings, there we go. So individual human beings were trained to be
unreasonably or more than usual good at rapid and high fidelity
calculation. And we used them to do that. And that enabled a whole big increase in bureaucratic
capacity. But it has the enormous dehumanizing characteristic of vastly up regulating certain
capacities out of out of all proportion to a whole human. And of course, completely ignoring
all the rest of them. And so if your job was to be a calculator, you go to work and you would sort
of flex a particular muscle to a high to hypertrophy. And the institution that you were
part of really didn't care at all about the rest of you. In fact, to the best of its ability,
tried not to. The Kafka ass nightmare. Yes. Yeah, to the point. And so I would say this is actually
a consequence, first and foremost, of complicatedness. But in particular,
one of the results of the institutional structures of the era of literacy. Now,
what happened, of course, is that the calculator properly or the technical calculator emerged,
which liberated humans from that particular role. And I mean that both earnestly, meaning it freed
people from the odium of being poor machines. But I also mean, ironically, meaning it caused them
to no longer have that job. And we'll get to that point in a moment. But the the era that we're
entering into, particularly AI era, but also the robotics here and others, portends a tremendously
larger liberation of humans from the odium of being mediocre machines. And I mean, this being
accountants and being lawyers, and frankly, in many cases, mean doctors, including and up to all
the other kinds of things that people do. And this begs an interesting question, which is, one,
how do we avoid the the inverse of that, which to say, how do we avoid the catastrophe of everybody
being unemployed? And then two, at the limit, what does that mean? Like what role do human beings play
in a world where so many things that human beings used to do are now being held vastly
more effectively by machines? And so the role of technology, those are some of the most fundamental
questions. And any new form of governance needs to address, particularly those two questions.
Well, we'll just say three, the three primary questions, which is,
how do we navigate the problem that our existing institutional structure
is premised around people only being able to meet their physical material needs by virtue of doing
certain kinds of work that are going to become obsolete relatively soon and relatively too
rapidly to try to do this retraining thing effectively. So that's one, I call I've called
up the coming great economic transition. Two, how do we do so in a fashion which ennobles the human
spirit? You know, something like a, we're all on the on the dole of the UBI, let's call it the UBI
nightmare, or the negative form of that, where everybody is sort of wandering around in the
soul destroying swamp that destroys people when they win the lottery is a is a is a fail fail
condition in a catastrophic way. And so we have to figure out that as well. Like, how do we
simultaneously migrate people to where they are properly liberated from the odium of being poor
machines, but actually liberated into a proper human role in the world? And what does that look
like? What is that? I would say, by the way, that it's making effective choices, that that's our
most fundamental thing. And that to become virtuous is directly related to that, but we'll get to
that in a moment. Okay, so let me let me then I've got two more bullet points that I think are
useful to put into the question about those first two, because I think there's a
I mean, of course, so there's been there's been analogues to this, they're not the same. So that's
why I'm using the word analog, right? So you get the displacement of the farmer in ancient,
in the Roman Republic, and in the Empire by the slave. And then you get the drift into the city
and you get the permanently unemployed living on the dole of the government, right? And then what
you have is you have the problem of the mob, which is I think is very analogous to what you're
proposing. And then the solution, of course, was the bread and circuses solution and then the pageantry
of the God King in order to distract people. And my concern is that it's not just a problem of
prescience you're pointing to, but there's also a problem of competition that all of these other
factors of entertainment, bread and circuses and God Kings is also already being adopted
as a prevalent and pervasive strategy for dealing with what you're pointing to. So it's not just
that there's something coming of which we are not prepared. It seems to me it's already occurring
and noxious elements that will thwart any real solution already have significant power and influence.
So I'm just trying to amplify what you're saying. Yeah, I don't, the way that you speak does not
allow the kind of aesthetics of firebrand to be voiced upon you, but that was a very firebrandy
thing you just said, which with which I agree profoundly. So I'll put it in a slightly different
way, I think. And by the way, if I'm putting it in a way that is not harmonious with what you just
said, you can obviously put the blame for that on me. The poor experts, I'm going to make a
distinction between expertise and competence, the poor experts who have been given, and in some
sense taken, authority and responsibility for governance, the technocracy. When faced with
the contemporary version of the Roman problematic that you just described,
seemed to have no other recourse than to implement a contemporary version of the same tools
the Romans implemented. So perhaps instead of lions and gladiators, we're currently using
Netflix and are exploring how we might use VR in the metaverse, but it's the same thing.
And so, and the point I would make when I say the poor experts is that they never had a chance
that the notion of expertise is one of the things that is, I would say, part of the notion of
complicatedness and isn't the right kind of thing. Yeah, expertise is a domain specific term,
not a domain general term. And interestingly enough is the kind of thing that machines
will be very much better at. Yes, already in many ways. Many ways and increasingly. And this other
category or other thing that I'll simply call competence is what will replace it. And by the
way, yes, and I also define competence as awareness, sensitivity to the whole context
that is under investigation. So as an example of what this new governance model looks like,
it is composed of holes that are deeply contextually governed. And so instead of
WHLE, by the way, WHLE, yes, rather than a disciplinary structure that endeavors to
analytically break worlds into discrete domains, which then one can produce expertise in,
and then endeavor to govern in a complicated fashion using some form of bureaucratic institution.
And the new form of governance, which by the way is the same as the old form of governance,
but now hopefully more robust. We actually are aware of the fact that context matters,
that all parts are parts of holes and deeply subtle and oftentimes very difficult to notice
fashions. And that the new competence involves a capacity to be in relationship with the sort
of the intrinsics of a well integrated whole, let's say for example, a river system,
which fully implicates all of the other things, both in terms of nested holes, like the river
system is part of both a water system and a air system, for example, and a biological system,
the presence of beavers significantly changes the notion of how rivers work. And the new,
the competence I am defining as a new sort of literacy or a new capacity in governance is both
awareness, what I just, the fact that I just pointed out, I that it is a whole and also
the fact that all holes implicate a variety of other kinds of holes in highly subtle
context sensitive ways, which is radically different from the kind of thing a that expertise
could ever do, and therefore be that even extremely sophisticated AI systems could ever do.
I fundamentally agree. In fact, it's always amazing to me how much our projects
resonantly converge. I mean, the whole project, one of the main thrusts of the
platonic dialogues with Socrates is to get people to make this move, to move them off
authority or intuition to expertise, and then say, but nevertheless, expertise is not wisdom,
and you do this sort of double move, and you're trying to get people be like you got trying to
get them post expertise in the understanding of what wisdom is. And then of course, you have in
that the platonic tonus, the stereoscopic commitment to we are always finite, we're always in the
finitary predicament, but we are always oriented towards transcendence, we are all we are oriented
towards the whole, right, the synoptic integration. And if we lose either one of these, we fall into
tyranny or servitude, and we have to hold the two together, and that that is a domain general thing,
and it's not an extra, it's not something for which there can be an expertise. And ultimately,
we can only properly love it, we can never possess it. Because if we think we possess it,
then we've converted it back into expertise, etc, etc. All of this is so I mean, and that's
of course what I'm trying to tease out, and turn into practice with the After Socrates project is
exactly that what you're calling competence that that but to me, that is the ancient platonic
call to the love of wisdom. Well, let's let's double click on that. So what I'd like to do is
I'd also now like to officially, they claim to the meaning of the term sovereignty. I feel that it
has been I'm a squatter, it's been it's been left under occupied. And by force measure, I'm claiming
it. Okay, let me define what I mean by it, please. So I'm going to kind of walk around a little bit
because I feel like I want to poke a few things. One of the things I've noticed about the American
constitutional frame, that I believe is a fundamental flaw, is that it largely defines itself
by virtue of a negative space in relationship to the monarchy with which it was struggling.
So the nation of liberty represents the degree to which an aristocracy has
right to limit the power of monarchy. This conception of liberty therefore intrinsically
implies a tyranny that is resistance against. Yeah, it's a freedom from the Berlin talks about
exactly. And unfortunately, therefore, as your various institutions that are endeavoring to
propose or hold liberty degrade as institutions are want to do, interestingly enough, the tyranny
that was held at the shadow, but nonetheless held in the story will raise its ugly face.
That's one way of this. I'm putting that out there because the notion of sovereignty that we have
received is equivalent, meaning it is largely described as a negative freedom. And I would say
that both the concept of the sovereign state and in a meaningful sense, the sovereign individual,
I mean by that in a moment, are in fact nonsense. The state cannot be sovereign per se. And that
is because the conception of sovereignty that is endeavor to be used is not coherent.
And that the sovereign individual, which is understood as the next step of the breaking
down of the kind of sovereignty that is described when we talk about the state as sovereign. So
we say we take the concept of sovereignty that we're using when we think of the sovereign state
and we simply replace the word state with the word individual. So we see a sovereign
in that sense. This is also incoherent. Okay. So what do I think is a coherent meaning for the
concept of sovereignty? What I mean is this, do you mean incoherent because it's largely negative
negatively defined and it doesn't have any internal coherency holding it together? Is that what
you mean? Okay, good. It exists only by virtue of describing something that it is in resistance
against. Like the way in the Cold War, freedom became freedom from communism. And then when
communism sort of ends, the notion of freedom becomes sort of unmoored and people realize
that it's incoherent. It has many different equivocal meanings floating around. Something
like that just by analogy. Very nice analogy. Okay. So from the inverse, from the center out,
and this is something I talked about at least an amount like five years ago, but I haven't
brought it up recently. The notion of sovereignty means the capacity to make effective choices
in a given context. We can explicate what I mean by effective choice, but for the moment,
I'll just leave that. But the point there is twofold. And by the way, the notion of sovereignty
therefore resonates very strongly with the broader notion of virtue, which is to say that a
being that has sovereignty is a being that also has a deep embodiment of a diverse number of
virtues in particular in relationship to a given context. And so one cannot be sovereign in essence
unless you're speaking about perhaps the notion of God as you discussed with Bishop Maximus,
which I will not get into this moment. But finite beings are sovereign in the context of an actual
context. And that could be as trivial as sovereign in the context of making wood burn into a fire,
or as fundamental as sovereign in the context of say parenting, or in the context of
stewarding a community in relationship with multi generations and the nature that they live in and
on. But the point is very simple, and it connects very nicely with the notion of competence, meaning
I have a set of capacities, which include appropriate perception and sensitivities,
heuristics and tools, which can operate at the appropriate rate to perceive the relevant aspects,
I'm talking about robust relevance realization and actuation, to perceive the relevant aspects of
the context that I find myself in. And then I have the capacities to select appropriate choices
that, and then to actuate them elegantly, meaning using the constraints of energy and
the actual constraints of the environment that I'm in.
High cost opportunity costs, all that kind of stuff. Yes, all that kind of stuff.
To further my capacity to make choices in the next moment that I find myself in.
So the metaphor that I often use is surfing, meaning if I am sovereign in the context of
surfing, what that means is that I have a surfboard and I know how to surf. And in this particular
wave, I have the physical acumen to be able to paddle into it and drop into it. And then moment
to moment, I can make the micro movements of my body in relationship with the unfolding
reality of the complexity of the wave, which of course is itself a deeply complex relationship
with the energy of the wave, the winds and the subsurface and subsurface topography of the ocean.
So as to continue to find myself in that unique location of wave, such that my board is still
locked into the pocket and I continue to surf. And I can expand that out. So when I say
but yeah, I want to stop there because I want to probe on this because
I want to make sure well, I'll propose something of what I think I might be hearing.
So it sounds to me like sovereignty, the sovereign, I'll just I'm going to use the word
individual in a very generic sense, the sovereign individual because I don't necessarily mean a
human person. The sovereign individual is a species of a cognitive agent. So everything behaves
but agents are different from behaviors and that agents can determine the consequences of
their behavior and alter the behavior in order to bring about desired consequences. And they
have desired consequences because they are autonomous, auto poetic entities, they're a
self making entity. And so a paramecium is properly, very properly an agent. Now, I'm
wondering if you would extend the notion of sovereignty to a paramecium. And if not, just
let me finish. If not, then when I'm when I'm hearing when you invoke things like virtue,
because I don't know if we could talk about the virtue of paramecium, I think we're moving into
the idea of an Aristotelian idea. And that's not that's meant to be a compliment, right,
that a sovereign is an agent that has has reflectively appropriated its agency in order to
further enhance its agency, by to some degree, explicating and reflecting upon the machinery
of its agency, and recursively intervening in its agency in order to enhance its agentic
capacity, not just to achieve this goal or that goal, but to enhance its overall capacity to
achieve goals per se. Does that work as a proposal? Yes, this works very nice. Now,
in my own sort of kluge vocabulary, I meet the distinction between lowercase s and capital s.
And so I would say that a paramecium is lowercase s sovereign, that the the human journey and its
relationship with the theological journey is the capital s. And here I'm very much inspired by the
conversations that you have with Jonathan Paggio in relationship with things like symbolism. Yes,
that it's a vector, right, when we cannot ever achieve in this world, capital s sovereignty as
a finished state, as you've said, but rather it is a relationship with life and relationship with
self that has a directionality to it, a very, very, very precise directionality. But it is
unfolding in continuity. And that's part of the nature of the journey that we're all as humans.
So we find ourselves in a very interesting point. I would say that there's a lowercase sovereignty
that goes down to the limits of agency, right? So I'm not going to be opining around the kind of
a the place where Stuart Kaufman spent so much time, you know, it's a autocatalytic chemistry
sovereign, maybe, but there's a limit where paramecium, and most specifically in my example,
something like say heart cell is lowercase s. And what we find is that in particular,
these lower level holes or elements achieve a level of sovereignty in relationship with
other elements around things that are properly well integrated holes. What I mean is, for example,
an organ like a heart or a liver is a gathering together of lower scale lowercase s sovereigns
in a fashion that delivers a higher scale lowercase s sovereignty over a more complex domain.
Yeah, this is John, John Stuart's idea about although there's no teleology in evolution,
there's a gradient shift towards what he calls increasing entification, in which you get previously
autonomous things form a hole that is able is not that gives results that are not just the sum
of the parts and therefore you get this evolutionary advantage. And you get you get these building
up and he's proposing that we need, I don't know if you've seen any of the conversations I've had
with him, but he's proposing that we need to really ramp up the entification of distributed
cognition into something that we can really clearly see as having a designated role in
governance to use your language. Yes, yes, in fact, I recently did a conversation with a young man in
I think he's German, very young man, but he has ruled out a proposal that I would say is precisely
this kind of thing like an entification of distributed cognition with a lot of very nice
thoughts. So a lot of the embodiment, a lot of the actual he calls it incarnation, which I quite like
of this new form of governance, I think is largely about that. So let me give you a concrete
example in a different view of something that you and I have been doing a lot of and this notion
of the logos. So we have two distinct elements to it. And I actually, I'll add a third, which is
always going to be there. One is we have the notion of something like lowercase sovereignty
between communicating agents in relationship with the capacity to engage in creating a
communications channel. All right. And let me just kind of step back a bit. So the problem we're
dealing with is that the problem of distributed cognition, the problem of communication between
two humans, I'll just make it simple at that point. In the past, say for the past 250 years,
has been governed by something like paradigmatic structures, where we have things like well
defined terms, and we have things like shared disciplinary knowledge. And what happens is
that we sort of have a dictionary of well defined terms. You can feel like the resonance of
complicatedness here. And the game is actually pretty simple. Either I understand the term,
or I have to learn the term. So I join a discipline, I become a doctor, and I learn what, you know,
some esoteric medical term happens to mean, once I have achieved a level of expertise in
that particular language, I can then communicate with other members of that community. Now,
that's how we have solved this problem in paradigmatic space. And the problem of digital
is that we now have something like 8 billion distinct humans all operating in a vast space
of developing novel relationships with novel increasingly novel realities. And all paradigmatic
dictionaries now kind of fail, meaning the interaction I have with somebody on Twitter,
the ability for us to diagnose whether or not we're actually part of a preexisting
institutional structure and are actually using the same code book to define certain terms.
Things are happening too rapidly. And by the way, the meaning of terms is changing too rapidly
for that paradigmatic model to work. So we need a new code.
I'm guilty of this mistake as well.
Yeah.
But we actually need a new fundamental protocol, which assumes that we don't know what we're
talking about that assumes more or less that we actually don't have a shared vocabulary.
That's so Socratic through and through. It really is.
Yeah, it is. Okay. So think about the Socratic, the implication, right? There's really
three elements. One element is we need to have something like a protocol. Like how do we actually
do this? And by the way, I'm using the word protocol both because it's something that Indigenous
communities have used for a long time in terms of how to distinct groups who don't know each other,
go through the process of actually coming into relationship with each other, which is exactly
we're talking about. It's the upper Paleolithic. It's the original upper Paleolithic problem, right?
And of course, symbolism and shamanism were plausibly part of the solution to that original
version of the problem. I just want to throw that into the mix. Keep going.
I have a very, very poor historical theory that I operate with and exactly how that works,
but I won't throw that out there now because it's super non-rigorous. But you know, I like it.
But in any event, we need a protocol. And the other side of protocol that in the technical
world we use, of course, is technical protocol, like the internet protocol, like IP. And if we
think about that, I don't know if you're old enough to remember, remember the old dial-up modem
and the way that it worked? If you think about it, every single sound that it made actually was a
physical instantiation of a certain stage of the protocol that actually builds up the process of
moving from, are we able to communicate at all? Are we both the kinds of things that have the
potential to communicate? Up through a series of things that they call handshakes of saying,
okay, well, great. You're the kind of thing that communicates. Neat. Let me make a proposal of how
we might communicate. Oh, you agree. Cool. Now, we're going to use that to bootstrap the next
level to the next level until eventually, you know, I can transmit AOL over a 56K connection
on top of twisted copper telephone wires, which is a pretty profound thing. We're talking about
the same kind of thing, right? Every time two individual humans connect via social media,
we're actually implicitly engaging in that kind of action poorly. Yes. So the new form of governance
is going to have to actually do that properly. We'll have a process whereby we can actually
identify where are we in some kind of well-defined stack of relationality and then have a process,
a protocol, for establishing a communications channel through which we can then engage in
building a context of relationality. Okay. So let me make sure I'm hearing you right. So one of the
central tasks of the new government, new governance, not new government, that was a slip, new governance
is to replace poor product protocol with proper protocol. Yes. Okay. Yes. And in a second, I'm
going to bring back one of the primary components of proper protocol. But for right now, I'm going to
say the second kind of capacity is competence in implementing that protocol. So to be sovereign
in relationship with communication. And you've actually put tremendous amount of effort into
that sort of thing in the context of things like what does a human being have to have as sort of
basic human capabilities to engage in dialogues? Right. Yeah. A simple example is one that I've
taken from my friend, Benita Roy, she taught me, was the notion of mapping error or the one that
you call that often, which has to do with disambiguation or noticing what there is.
Now, what's the word that you used to describe it? When a meaning is not clear.
Like equivocal?
equivocal. Exactly. You know, a new literacy is to have a psychological awareness of the fact
that terms can be equivocal. And that quite often, if you are communicating with somebody,
and their use of a term doesn't make any sense to you, you are likely dealing with an equivocation,
or perhaps even distinct linguistic histories, where they're using that word to mean something
completely differently, because it is embodied in a very different lineage context. And having,
for example, an emotional response of curiosity, and the ability to activate a disambiguation
protocol, as opposed to an emotional response of wanting to punch them in the face or cancel them,
for example. Right. You know, in the current environment, because we're operating using
very broken indigenous, you know, human tribal familial capacities to engage in this
random walkthrough innovation space, we find ourselves in the unspeakably novel context
of endeavoring to communicate with human beings that we've never met, are currently interacting
with in embodied fashion, via principally just small amounts of text, and therefore oftentimes
make mistakes, like we get really angry when they say something that doesn't sound right to us.
Okay. And you get the reverse error that people try to communicate the wrong kind of thing
in a medium. They try to communicate a philosophical argument on Twitter, which is a disaster.
Which is a disaster, exactly. And by the way, it goes all the way down. Like my wife and I
being very nerdy, have many times had the conversation of, to me, darling, that particular
question that you're asking is not appropriately asked while you're driving in the car using text.
Yeah. Yeah. We should wait, like, you know, until we have an interpersonal face to face to
have that conversation, because that's the appropriate communications context to have
that particular kind of relationality. So let me loop back to the notion of what a proper protocol
ultimately unfolds into. A proper protocol creates the appropriate communications context
to then begin the embodiment of the proper relational context that has the right sort
of richness and sensitivity and nuance to instantiate a wholeness that we can build
then a relational competence that can hold whatever it is we're actually going to be dealing with.
I see what you mean now. I mean, the workshops where we take people through meditation,
contemplation, the circling practices into the philosophical fellowship. And then we do all
of that to build up that protocol. Right. And then we, the people are introduced to dialectic
into deologos. Exactly. And let me tell you, my study of this tells me that just getting that part
right will resolve 80% of the problems we're currently dealing with. It is profound what
happens if we just get the combination of a proper protocol, which has this very specific
element of understanding that communication context that develops proper relationality
and humans who are sovereign in the context of those two pieces. If we get that element together,
multiplied by the fact that we actually do have 8 billion agentic minds that are just sort of
radically being underutilized, lots of good stuff happens and lots of bad stuff goes away.
Okay. So that's one example of what this new Neo-Neocortex looks like. Let me give you a
different example. And then I think we may have actually been kind of running out of time, which is
nice. It feels like we've done some really good stuff. Well, I think we've laid the
foundations for the series very well. Yeah. So I mean, lay this other one down,
because I feel like it's potent. And I noticed that it confused, actually, Schmacktenberger,
when I talked with him about it about a year and a half ago, it didn't land then. And I'm not sure
if it ever really did. So if we think about an old fashioned notion of government, and we'll all
just use the American way of doing it, we ended up dividing it into three distinct domains, the
executive, the legislative, and the juridical. Here's my proposition. My proposition is that the
move into the digital has, as a primary element, a radical releasing of energies, let's say,
that have been unduly bound into this location of being a false machine. In other words,
the civic code. We made a mistake of binding too much into algorithms and binding too much into
humans running bureaucracies and things like that. And then the move into the digital liberates that
tremendously. We talked about that a moment ago in terms of liberating human energy that we no
longer have to be calculators. But I mean the same thing in the context of these higher order
abstractions of governance. And specifically what I mean is, the notion of the function of the
legislative, of which, by the way, the regulatory is a subsidiary, is radically displaced in the new
form of governance, that the era of literacy was the crowning of the legislative, and that's no
longer either needed or necessary or proper. That the era of the digital involves a radically
reduction, a radical reduction of the legislative function, and a restoration of the juridical
function. Which, by the way, completely changes the location of the executive function, but I
don't think we have time to get there. And what I discovered when I was thinking about this is a
really beautiful notion of revival. And I think you may have actually been the one who put it in my
head, or maybe Bishop Maximus, because I'm thinking about Exodus, and I'm thinking about Moses.
And I'm thinking about topology. So, in the story of Moses, who played a very interesting
role. Moses played the role of governance in the context of the Jews traveling across the
desert as the direct interface to God. But he played the role of judge, not the role of king.
There were many judges. There's a whole book of the Bible.
Yeah, that transition is the key. That tells me, to the story of the Torah,
let's say the Old Testament, that the notion of judge is more fundamental. It is the proper
location of where the heart of governance is. Meaning, it's how you steward the commons,
and think about how commons' law works. Oh, I see. This is very interesting.
Jeritical. Commons' law. Jeritical. What does that mean? What that means is
wisdom. We use wisdom to resolve disputes, as opposed to endeavoring to codify
choice, create constraints in bureaucracies to govern choice. We rather recognize that sovereign
human beings, and I mean this in both senses in the term now, are making choices locally at the
lowest level on the ground with the highest degree of a perception of what's really happening, and
the highest degree of the ability to ultimately express their values into world by themselves,
like in small self-organizing groups. And that the biggest challenge, the most fundamental
challenge of governance, beyond, by the way, communication, which we just covered, is resolving
conflict, where these groups of individuals and groups of individuals find themselves noticing
that their sovereignty is not adequate to the scope of the wholeness that they are in relationship with.
And therefore, we need to have individuals who are notably wise and are arranged in such a way.
When Moses was counseled to make subsidiarity a principle and grant
juridical authority to a constellation of judges besides himself,
it was done fractally at different levels of scale, all the way down to, I believe, 10,
which is really neat to think about that granularly. But the two rules were that the
individuals were wise and they were not corruptible, and they were not likely to be
off, meaning that their interests were aligned with both the individuals that they were interacting
with personally and with the larger whole, and they had a competence, they had a sovereignty
that was adequate to the responsibility that they were holding. Well, that's that. And so
this is there's two moves here. One move is the removal of the legislative as the center or the
more fundamental notion of governance, which is the same thing as the removal of the bureaucratic
or the algorithmic. And the second is the restoration of a subsidiarity or a fractal,
wisdom based commons law that is principally around developing highly context aware. Remember the
notion of the legislature has to do with the abstraction of trying to create general rules
that are as relevant to particular contexts as they can be.
Prespecify. Yes, I get it. Context aware. Whereas a fine grained common law is precisely
context aware. It is a conflict between two real situated humans in a real actual environment that
has real actual consequences for all the other people in the nature with which they're in relationship.
And a proper judge has proper responsibility for addressing the whole thing.
It may be that X is the right thing to do instead of Y. And that's the judge's job. And then we want
to do is we want to build the right kind of meta context such that the judges aren't corrupt,
that the judges are there, that they're wise. And by wise, I actually mean both that they actually
have real sovereignty in relationship to the context they have responsibility for, but also
that they're actually embedded, meaning that they're legitimate in the Habermasian sense.
Does that make sense? Yeah, so far it does. So I mean, two questions emerge. One is,
why did the Israel, I mean, I'm going to use the mythological language. I'm asking a general
question, but why did the Israelites want to replace the judges with kings? Because that seems
to be a question that needs to be answered. And I think there's a related question, which is,
how do we deal with the Promethean spirit, which regards tradition as something to be overcome
because we emphasize the progress into the new? And how do we keep that distinct from the openness
to emergence? That for me is a pressing problem right now, right? You want to be beholding to
the tradition, but you don't want to fall into being a traditionalist. You want to be somebody
who is open to emergence without pronouncing death on the, commit it to the flames of the tradition.
And then thirdly, you have Plato's problem. Who's going to guard the guardians? The philosopher
kings are very much Plato's attempt to get something like the judges. And of course,
it did happen. We had Marcus Aurelius. But the thing that's interesting there is it took,
it took non-constitutional constraints, a bunch of gay emperors that adopted their errors,
bunch of errors from which they then chose the most competent, really in your sense,
in order for it to work. And of course, Plato didn't have a solution to that problem,
and he kept wrestling with it. And many people, in fact, argue that the republic is,
and I agree with this, is a profound critique of any utopic proposals.
So that would be the three questions, and maybe those can be the questions we could
pursue next time. Yeah, can I just address a little bit of the first, just kind of put a hook,
and then I think it's exactly right for us to do the rest next time, because it feels to me like
that's a, what I'd like to do is invoke and open a proper space of deologous on that question.
Yes, yes, totally. It goes without saying that's a quite a potent question. All right,
so the first, I will put this out here, and I think it creates some pretty good hooks. And the
regional question, the first question was, why did the Israelites go from judges to kings?
Here's why, I think. I will say it with some assertiveness. The executive function,
which is fundamentally the king, and remember, for example, in medieval Europe, the king played
both the role of judge, like juridical functions grounded in the king, and the judges who traveled
around and implemented common law were direct reports to the king, and also played the military
function, here's the thing. The executive function, which is to say the enforcement of the law,
in a well constituted community, is an intrinsic of the juridical function. Let me make that
explicit. So let's say we have a group of 10 people, and they all know each other, like they're all
in real relationship, and they've all identified a given individual as wise, which is to say that
individual has high legitimacy. They all trust this person as wise and well-intentioned with regard
to both each individual and to the larger group as a whole. So a properly created community,
when a conflict emerges between members of that community, and eventually becomes something that
is subject to juridical evaluation, the wise elder will opine on it, will speak with wisdom and
clarity, and if done well, if they actually have done a proper job, that it's self-enforcing, meaning
that the one person, for example, or perhaps the two people in conflict, who may or may not be super
awesome, happy with the results of the judgment, have aid other people in the community, that
they're in very deep complex relationship with, who are all sort of looking at them and saying,
look, this is how we do it here. And wisdom has spoken, and honestly, it sounds pretty fucking
wise. So I don't know what problem you've got with it, but get in line. It's self-enforcing,
because the community actually has proper scale, meaning there's not too many people involved,
and it has proper verticality, that the wisdom is legitimate. Now, we have two problems that emerge.
One is when you're dealing with war, when you're actually dealing with problems where many of your
disputes don't have a shared sense of wisdom. When I have a dispute with a neighboring tribe,
let's say the Philistines, and I don't have any shared elder, we can resolve those disputes in
the fashion I just described, we resolve disputes using war, and war is king, not judge. And what
happened to the ancient Israelites is that the day they left the desert, and they entered the land
of milken honey, they immediately entered into war, and therefore left the realm of judge qua
judge, and entered the realm of king qua king. And we have been living in that world ever since,
both historically in some sense, and also within the mythological sense. And so one of the reasons
why our current governance system is so jacked is it's in fact designed to constantly be fighting war.
And therefore the elevation of the executive. The other side of it is when you are entered into
a place that has a muscular legislature, and no longer is grounded in a commons, then there aren't
any any truly integrated holes that have both horizontality and vertical, right? When I have
a judge in the American political system, evaluate the laws that are written by a legislature,
I have no particular sense that any of those guys are either a non corrupt or b wise or c
have my interest in mind at all, and is imposed upon me, as if it's at war. And so therefore,
I then again have to be and have a relationship of king. The only way to enforce the laws in a
society where everyone is fundamentally separated from proper real relationality,
is the implementation of the king style, the executive at the top. And when we have moved
into this new form of governance, this neo neo cortex, remember I mentioned planetary scale
is one of the problematics that we're dealing with. All humans will be in fact in a relationship of
context, relationship of a fully integrated proper whole with verticality and horizontality,
which means that we are no longer in a position of intrinsically at war, but rather in a space
where the juridical can and therefore, and should play the proper role as the base of
governance, which is very nice. It also applies to the default state of everybody being in a
relationship of sort of default war, meaning social relationships, relationships that are
not real, not rich, will also no longer be the case. And so conflict can in fact be mitigated by
a properly constructed juridical constellation. So I'll put that as a provisional answer to the
first question and propose that it also creates a tremendous amount of hooks into the nature of
how we might respond to the second question. Well, I'm going to give you an initial thing
about the second question then, since you did an initial for the first, which is Moses isn't
just a judge, he's also a prophet and all of the judges were also prophets. In fact, the terms are
used and then after the institution of the king, the prophet becomes distinct. And then of course,
the idea is Christ brings back the pre re integrates the priest, the king and the prophet.
But here's the thing about the emergence issue, right? I think we shouldn't judge people,
sorry, we shouldn't people should not ascend to the role or if that's even the right verb,
but whatever, ascend to the role of judge just because of their retrospective capacity to deal
with appropriating and applying the tradition, they should also have a prophetic capacity
to disclose what is pertinent and perennial in a way that shakes people up to what is emerging.
Oh, man, that is so sweet. Yes. That is beautiful. Good Lord. I feel like a limited manuscript in
words. So thank you. Yeah. So let's play with those two ideas when we come back and pick this up.
And as always, I'm going to give my guest, which is you, the opportunity for last word.
Doesn't that be summative or cumulative? It could just be inspirational, aspirational or
provocative. It could be enigmatic, but how what parting word do you want to leave?
Let's call it an invocation. We entered into this stage of our relationship, our dialogue,
with a sense of timeliness, meaning that it appears that we are now at a time where it's
proper, necessary and possible for this new form of governance to finally begin the process of
happening. And so the invocation is that perhaps this conversation will begin that in earnest,
and that perhaps we're kicking off something deeply new in the human story.
I hope so too. Thank you so much, my dear friend. Wow.